This file describes how to run the BOAT script written by Jennifer Asimit during her time
in the Metabolic Disease group led by Ines Barroso at the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute.
BOAT is an outcome from Jennifer's Medical Research Council Methodology Research fellowship (MR/K021486/1).

The analysis requires two R source files and one bash script (to run Plink). The files are called in the following sequence:
A) pre-overlap-analysis-general-script.R
B) clump-using-plink.sh
C) overlap-analysis-general-script.R

The three scripts listed above are the only scripts that the user needs to call,
but the other scripts are necessary for the main script to work properly.  The scripts are 
written such that all the scripts need to be in the same directory as the data so that they can be found. Note that in order to perform the clumping, a reference panel, such as from 1000 Genomes CEU, will be required. 

A) The first R script (pre-overlap-analysis-general-script.R) is needed to calculate the Approximate Bayes' factors (ABFs) from the summary statistics for each trait, and then the joint measure for clumping in Plink. It is recommended to run this separately for each chromosome. 
This script takes 8 input parameters:
1) Summary Statistics file for Trait 1 
2) Summary Statistics file for Trait 2  
3) OutputT1.file: Output file name for Trait 1 (will contain ABF for Trait 1 at variants in both datasets, and retains information from input file (1) 
4) OutputT2.file: Output file name for Trait 2 (will contain ABF for Trait 2 at variants in both datasets, and retains information from input file (2) 
5) Output1.file: Main output file, will contain variants in both datasets and the joint measures  needed for clumping (one for p-values and one for ABFs)
6) R: Ratio of type I error cost to type II error cost (R>1 gives a "discovery" mode and a value of R=20 is recommended for discovery)
7) pi0: Prior probability of an association at a SNP (pi0=0.99 is useful for discovery, as searching for shared variants and not genome-wide significant)
8) alpha: threshold for p-value based analysis (an example is 0.001)

The Summary Statistics Files for Traits 1 and 2 are each a tab-delimited file with one line per SNP. There is no need to order the SNPs in the files to match each other and it is fine to have SNPs that are present in only one file. The script will format appropriately.
The columns can be in any order, but require the following names in the header (additional columns will be ignored):
1) SNP		(rs id)
2) Effect	
3) StdErr
4) P.value

The script is called in the following manner from the command line:

>R CMD BATCH '--args arg_1 arg_2 arg_3 arg_4 arg_5 arg_6 arg_7 arg_8' pre-overlap-analysis-general-script.R pre-overlap-analysis-general-script.Rout


B) The bash script (clump-using-plink.sh) takes 3 input parameters:
1) Output1.file, which is output after running pre-overlap-analysis-general-script.R.
2) Reference Panel file name stub, in Plink binary format (e.g. file name stub of 1kg-ceu.bed, 1kg-ceu.bim, 1kg-ceu.fam is 1kg-ceu)
3) measure: Parameter indicating which measure of evidence is to be used; options are abf and pv, for ABF and p-value, respectively

The script is called in the following manner from the command line:

./clump-using-plink.sh arg_1 arg_2 arg_3

This script will output a gzipped file of approximately independent SNPs (have r^2 < 0.1), based on the joint association measures. The output file has name "Output1.file"-"measure".clumped.gz. E.g. If Output1.file is called "Joint-measures.txt" and the measure is "abf", then the output file will be "Joint-measures.txt-abf.clumped.gz"

C) This is the main analysis step. The second R script (overlap-analysis-general-script.R) takes as input the files created in the previous steps. 
NOTE: To test for enrichment of overlap variants, the 22 chromosome files should be concatenated into one file. If one only wishes to obtain a list of overlap variants and their marginal test statistics, then it is fine to run this script on each individual chromosome.

The 9 input parameters are:
1) OutputT1.file (Trait 1 concatenated chromosome output files from step (A) or individual chromosome file from (A))
2) OutputT2.file  (Trait 2 concatenated chromosome output files from step (A) or individual chromosome file from (A))
3) R: Ratio of type I error cost to type II error cost (R>1 gives a "discovery" mode and a value of R=20 is recommended for discovery)
4) pi0: Prior probability of an association at a SNP (pi0=0.99 is useful for discovery, as searching for shared variants and not genome-wide significant)
5) alpha: threshold for p-value based analysis (an example is 0.001)
6) ABForPV: takes value 1 to use ABFs and value 0 to use p-values
7) output file from clump-using-plink.sh: "Output1.file"-"measure".clumped.gz
8) main.output.file1: output list of significant overlap variants and their marginal statistics for trait 1, followed by trait 2 
(e.g. header: SNP Effect StdErr P.value abf SNP Effect StdErr P.value abf 
where the first 5 columns refer to Trait 1 and the latter 5 columns are for Trait 2)
9) main.output.file2: output file with parameter information and p-value for test of more overlap variants than expected by chance

The script is called in the following manner from the command line:

>R CMD BATCH '--args arg_1 arg_2 arg_3 arg_4 arg_5 arg_6 arg_7 arg_8 arg_9' overlap-analysis-general-script.R overlap-analysis-general-script.Rout






